I sent a message to the list toward the end of the Cheney diplomatic
tour

of 10 Middle Eastern countries pointing out that all of their
governments

expressed strong opposition to an American attack on Iraq with

conventional forces.

This unanimous opposition to an Iraq campaign tended to be under-
reported

in the U.S. media, though as usual the print media did somewhat better
in

letting Middle Easterners speak with their own voice. On Fox News,
Fred

Barnes dismissed these protests as merely for public consumption and
said

that the 'speeches' had been written before Cheney even arrived. He,
like

many commentators, simply made the urgent public representations of no

less than ten heads of state disappear, and substituted for them his
own

conviction that behind closed doors they were far more open to an
attack

on Iraq. But, of course, he offered no proof for this assertion, and
is

not known to be able to parse Arabic verbs. We know that some Saudi

officials were more open to a covert operation against Iraq than to

putting 200,000 US troops up the Tigris and Euphrates valley. But we
do

not know that King Abdullah II of Jordan or Husni Mubarak or Saudi's
CP

Abdullah or the emir of Kuwait agreed with this sentiment. Barnes's

punditry reminds one of Edward Said's maxim "they cannot represent

themselves; they must be represented." (Barnes today finally admitted

that the Cheney tour had been a disaster and that the Arab League
really

is against an Iraq war).

I also argued that it mattered to leaders like Mubarak whether the
U.S.

was restoring sovereignty to an Arab League member such as Kuwait (as
in

1991) or whether it was attempting to overthrow the sovereignty an
Arab

League member.

That the opposition in the Arab world to a frontal US assault on Iraq

should be taken seriously was underlined at the Arab League Summit in

Beirut this week.

Vice-Chair of the Iraqi Revolutionary Command Council, `Izzat ibrahim,

pledged his country to recognize the sovereignty of Kuwait, to never
again

to invade that country, to work together on missing persons issues,
and to

continue conversations with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan about
resuming

UN weapons inspections.

In return, Iraq got three boons from the Arab League. It unanimously

affirmed its commitment to collective security for the Arab world,
saying

that an attack on one (including Iraq) would be an attack on all.

Second, the League backed the rights of Iraq and Syria to the waters
of

Euphrates and Tigris (against the claims of Turkey to greater use of

headwaters for irrigation). Third, it called for economic sanctions on

Iraq to be lifted.

We all heard about the kiss `Izzat Ibrahim got from CP Abdullah, but
the

behind-the-scenes warm handshakes from Kuwaiti officials were less

reported. All of this seems to me quite remarkable. It is clear that
the

Arab leaders are pulling around the wagons and launching a vigorous

diplomatic campaign to forestall a US frontal attack on Iraq.

The US was quick to dismiss the Iraqi pledges, pointing to the Saddam

Hussein government's long record of refusing to honor commitments
entered

into.

The military experts on this list can speak to the issue better than I

can. But if the Saudis and Qataris deny the US use of air bases for an

attack on Iraq; and if the Kuwaitis decline to be the staging ground
for a

200,000 strong invasion force; then it seems to me that the US would
have

to fall back on Turkey. Bulent Ecevit, the prime minister, is a man of

the Left and has announced himself opposed to such a campaign for fear
it

will stir the Kurds up all over again. Some think Turkey might be
imposed

on to offer its Incirlik air base for a US strike on Saddam, but only
if

the US puts a few billion into the Turkish government's hands up
front.

During the Gulf War the GHW Bush administration promised Turkey at
least a

billion dollars of aid to make up for its losses from pipeline tolls
and

trade. Turkey joined in. But in 1995 Congress absolutely refused to
give

Turkey the money despite Bill Clinton's best efforts. (I never heard
why

the US legislators stiffed our ally this way, but it hasn't made
Turkey

eager to sign on for another economic catastrophe).

Even if Turkey can be bribed and cajoled into allowing such a
campaign, US

officials should be aware that a US/Turkey attack on an Arab country
will

look very bad, especially in the absence of *any* prominent Arab ally.

The Arab League is already worried about Turkish hydropolitics with
regard

to Iraq and Syria. Americans are not good at history, and mostly
cannot

remember the age of colonialism or imagine that it has anything to do
with

*them*. But Arab nationalism emerged in part as a fight against

imperialism, and for a Western country and a non-Arab local comprador
to

fall voraciously on an Arab nation will evoke for most Arabs years
like

1956. Pentagon planners should remember that in 1956, France, Britain
and

Israel handily won the military war. But they lost the war of world

public opinion, and so ended up forfeiting their victory. The U.S.,
while

very powerful, is not all-powerful, and a military adventure with so
many

diplomatic strikes against it to begin with could easily end in

catastrophe regardless of how well the smart bombs work.

I do not think you can wage an Afghanistan-type war in Iraq without

inflicting substantial civilian casualties. Baghdad and Basra are not

like Mazar-i Sharif--and even in sparsely populated Afghanistan
innocent

villagers were bombed. Beyond being blown up, civilians would face

potential fatalities from the lost of energy (the Pentagon targets the

energy grid as part of its strategy of knocking out a government's
command

and control). Since Iraqi water treatment facilities are already

nullified by the ban on imports of chlorine, if people do not have
energy

they would have no way of heating their water so as to make it
potable,

and would be exposed to dysentery, cholera etc., with devastating

consequences especially for children (already suffering from the

embargo--though admittedly it is in large part the fault of the Baath

Party). Anyway, if the US thought the world press was unforgiving of

civilian casualties in Afghanistan, it has not seen anything like the

firestorm that such an assault on highly urbanized Iraq will provoke

throughout the global South and in Europe.

Meanwhile, the U.S. has increased the number of its troops in Kuwait
to

3000 and is thinking of expanding that number to a full brigade (about

5000 men, right?).

Sincerely,

Juan Cole

U of Michigan
